Running your server
===================

Running the pre-packaged server that comes with the conan installers (or pip packages) is simple. Just open
a terminal and type:

.. code:: bash

   $ conan_server
   
.. note::

    On Windows, you might experience problems with the server, if you run it under bash/msys. It is
    better to launch it in a regular ``cmd`` window.

This server is mainly for testing (though it might work fine for small teams). If you need a 
more stable, responsive and robust server, you should run it from source:

Running from source (linux)
---------------------------

The conan installer includes a simple executable **conan_server** for a server quick start.
But you can use the **conan server** through the WSGI application, which means that you can use gunicorn
to run the app, for example.


First, clone the conan repository from source and install the requirements:

.. code-block:: bash

    $ git clone https://github.com/conan-io/conan.git
    $ cd conan
    $ git checkout master
    $ pip install -r conans/requirements.txt
    $ pip install -r conans/requirements_server.txt
    $ pip install gunicorn
    
    
- Run the server aplication with gunicorn. In the following example we will run server on port 9300 with 4 workers and a timeout of 2 minutes (for big uploads/downloads):


.. code-block:: bash

    $ gunicorn -b 0.0.0.0:9300 -w 4 -t 120 conans.server.server_launcher:app


- You can also bind to an IPV6 address or specify both IPv4 and IPv6 addresses:

.. code-block:: bash

    $ gunicorn -b 0.0.0.0:9300 -b [::1]:9300 -w 4 -t 120 conans.server.server_launcher:app


Server configuration
--------------------
Your server configuration lives in ``~/.conan_server/server.conf``. You can change values
there, prior to launching the server. Note that the server is not reloaded when the values are changed. You
have to stop and restart it manually.

The server configuration file is by default:

.. code-block:: text

   [server]
   jwt_secret: MnpuzsExftskYGOMgaTYDKfw
   jwt_expire_minutes: 120
   
   ssl_enabled: False
   port: 9300
   public_port:
   host_name: localhost
   
   store_adapter: disk
   authorize_timeout: 1800
   
   # Just for disk storage adapter
   disk_storage_path: ~/.conan_server/data
   disk_authorize_timeout: 1800
   
   updown_secret: NyiSWNWnwumTVpGpoANuyyhR
   
   
   [write_permissions]
   # "opencv/2.3.4@lasote/testing": default_user, default_user2
   
   [read_permissions]  
   # opencv/1.2.3@lasote/testing: default_user default_user2
   # By default all users can read all blocks
   */*@*/*: *
     
   [users]
   demo: demo
   

Server parameters
+++++++++++++++++

* The client server authorization is done with JWT. ``jwt_secret`` is a random string used to 
  generate authentication tokens. You can change it safely anytime (in fact it is a good practice),
  the change will just force users to log in again. ``jwt_expire_minutes`` is the amount of time
  that users remain logged-in within the client without having to introduce their credentials
  again.

* Server settings are defined with ``host_name`` and ``port``. You must use the machine's IP where you are running your 
  server (or domain name), something like ``host_name: 192.168.1.100``. This IP (or domain name) has to be visible (and resolved) 
  by the conan client, so take it in account if your server has multiple network interfaces. 
  
  There is another parameter ``public_port``, which might be needed if
  running virtualized, docker or any other kind of port redirection. Files uploads/downloads are
  served with their own URLs, generated by the system, so the file storage backend is independent.
  Those URLs need the public port they have to communicate from the outside. If you leave it 
  blank, it will use the ``port`` value. 
  
  **Example:** Use conan_server in a docker container that internally runs in the 9300 port but it
  exposes the 9999 port (where the clients will connect to):
  
.. code-block:: bash 
   
   docker run ... -p9300:9999 ... # Check Docker docs for that
  
  
**server.conf**

.. code-block:: text
  
  
   [server]

   ssl_enabled: False
   port: 9300
   public_port: 9999
   host_name: localhost
  
* ``ssl_enabled``: Conan doesn't handle the SSL traffic by itself, but you can use a proxy like nginx to redirect the SSL traffic to your conan server. 
If your conan clients are connecting with "https" set `ssl_enabled` to True. This way conan_server will generate the upload/download urls with "https" 
instead of "http".
  
  **Example:** Running conan server with SSL using nginx.
  
**server.conf**

.. code-block:: text
  
   [server]

   ssl_enabled: True # Up/down urls will be https
   port: 9300
   public_port: 80 # Nginx will handle the ssl
   host_name: myservername.mydomain.com
    

  
**nginx conf file**

.. code-block:: text
  
  
   server { 
       listen 443;
       server_name myservername.mydomain.com;
   
       location / {
         proxy_pass http://localhost:9300;
       }
       ssl on;
       ssl_certificate /etc/nginx/ssl/server.crt;
       ssl_certificate_key /etc/nginx/ssl/server.key;
   }
   
   
.. note::

   **Important**: Conan client, by default, will validate the server SSL certificates and won't connect if it's not valid.
   If you have self signed certificates you have two options:
   
   1. Use the ``conan remote`` command to disable the SSL certifate checks. e.j: *conan remote add/update myremote https://somedir False*
   2. Append the server ``.crt`` file contents to ``~/.conan/cacert.pem`` file.
  
  
* Conan has implemented an extensible storage backend, based on the abstract class ``StorageAdapter``.
  Currently the server only supports storage in ``disk``. The folder in which uploaded packages
  are stored (i.e., the folder you would want to backup) is defined in ``disk_storage_path``. 
  The storage backend might use a different channel, and uploads/downloads are authorized up to
  a maximum of ``authorize_timeout`` seconds. The value should be enough so large downloads/uploads
  are not rejected, but not too big to prevent hanging up the file transfers. The value 
  ``disk_authorize_timeout`` is not currently used. File transfers are authorized with their own
  tokens, generated with the secret ``updown_secret``. This value should be different from the above 
  ``jwt_secret```.
  
  
Permissions parameters
++++++++++++++++++++++
  
By default, the server configuration is similar to the conan.io server. Read can be done anonymous,
but uploading requires registered users. Users can be easily registered in the ``[users]`` section,
defining a pair of ``login: password`` for each one. Yes, plain text passwords at the moment, but
as the server is on-premises (behind firewall), you just need to trust your sysadmin :)

If you want to restrict read/write access to specific packages, configure it in the ``[read_permissions]``
and ``[write_permissions]`` sections. These sections allow a sequence of patterns and allowed users,
in the form:

.. code-block:: text

   package/version@user/channel: allowed_user1, allowed_user2

E.g.:

.. code-block:: text

   */*@*/*: * # allow all users to all packages
   PackageA/*@*/*: john, peter # allow john and peter access to any PackageA
   */*@project/*: john # Allow john to access any package from the "project" user
   
The rules are evaluated in order, if the left side of the pattern matches, the rule is applied
and it will not look further.



Got any doubts? Please check out our :ref:`FAQ section <faq>` or |write_us|.


.. |write_us| raw:: html

   <a href="mailto:info@conan.io" target="_blank">write us</a>
