<a id="conan-tools-cmake-helper"></a>

# CMake

The `CMake` build helper is a wrapper around the command line invocation of cmake. It will abstract the
calls like `cmake --build . --config Release` into Python method calls. It will also add the argument
`-DCMAKE_TOOLCHAIN_FILE=conan_toolchain.cmake` (from the generator `CMakeToolchain`) to the `configure()` call,
as well as other possible arguments like `-DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=<config>`. The arguments that will be used are obtained from a
generated `CMakePresets.json` file.

The helper is intended to be used in the `build()` method, to call CMake commands automatically
when a package is being built directly by Conan (create, install)

```python
from conan import ConanFile
from conan.tools.cmake import CMake, CMakeToolchain, CMakeDeps

class App(ConanFile):
    settings = "os", "arch", "compiler", "build_type"
    requires = "hello/0.1"
    options = {"shared": [True, False], "fPIC": [True, False]}
    default_options = {"shared": False, "fPIC": True}

    def generate(self):
        tc = CMakeToolchain(self)
        tc.generate()
        deps = CMakeDeps(self)
        deps.generate()

    def build(self):
        cmake = CMake(self)
        cmake.configure()
        cmake.build()
```

**Experimental** feature.  `CMake.configure()`, `CMake.build()` and `CMake.install()` methods have the **subfolder** parameter in case you have
more than one `CMakeLists.txt` in different folders.
This feature allows you to call the **configure** **build** and **install** method of each **CMakeLists.txt**
separately and without mixing the generated files and artifacts, also creating these folders in the
**build folder** and **package folder**.

In the following example, we can see what it would look like if we had two different **CMakeLists.txt**
(**cmake_1/CMakeLists.txt** and **cmake_2/CMakeLists.txt**) in the **folder1** and **folder2** folders.

```python
def build(self):
    cmake = CMake(self)

    # Configure and build source_folder/cmake_1/CMakeLists.txt in folder1
    cmake.configure(build_script_folder="cmake_1", subfolder="folder1")
    cmake.build(subfolder="folder1")

    # Configure and build source_folder/cmake_2/CMakeLists.txt in folder2
    cmake.configure(build_script_folder="cmake_2" subfolder="folder2")
    cmake.build(subfolder="folder2")
```

## Reference

### *class* CMake(conanfile)

CMake helper to use together with the CMakeToolchain feature

* **Parameters:**
  **conanfile** ŌĆō The current recipe object. Always use `self`.

#### configure(variables=None, build_script_folder=None, cli_args=None, stdout=None, stderr=None, subfolder=None)

Reads the `CMakePresets.json` file generated by the
[CMakeToolchain](https://docs.conan.io/2//reference/tools/cmake/cmaketoolchain.html.md#conan-cmake-toolchain) to get:

> - The generator, to append `-G="xxx"`.
> - Toolchain path to append `-DCMAKE_TOOLCHAIN_FILE=/path/conan_toolchain.cmake`
> - The declared `cache variables` to append `-Dxxx`.

and call `cmake`.

* **Parameters:**
  * **variables** ŌĆō Should be a dictionary of CMake variables and values, that will be mapped
    to command line `-DVAR=VALUE` arguments.
    Recall that in the general case information to CMake should be passed in
    `CMakeToolchain` to be provided in the `conan_toolchain.cmake` file.
    This `variables` argument is intended for exceptional cases that wouldnŌĆÖt
    work in the toolchain approach.
  * **build_script_folder** ŌĆō Path to the CMakeLists.txt in case it is not in the declared
    `self.folders.source` at the `layout()` method.
  * **cli_args** ŌĆō List of arguments `[arg1, arg2, ...]` that will be passed
    as extra CLI arguments to pass to cmake invocation
  * **subfolder** ŌĆō (Experimental): subfolder to be created inside the `build_folder` and
    the `package_folder`. If not provided, files will be
    placed in the `build_folder` and `package_folder` root.
  * **stdout** ŌĆō Use it to redirect stdout to this stream
  * **stderr** ŌĆō Use it to redirect stderr to this stream

#### build(build_type=None, target=None, cli_args=None, build_tool_args=None, stdout=None, stderr=None, subfolder=None)

* **Parameters:**
  * **build_type** ŌĆō Use it only to override the value defined in the `settings.build_type`
    for a multi-configuration generator (e.g. Visual Studio, XCode).
    This value will be ignored for single-configuration generators, they will
    use the one defined in the toolchain file during the install step.
  * **target** ŌĆō The name of a single build target as a string, or names of multiple build
    targets in a list of strings to be passed to the `--target` argument.
  * **cli_args** ŌĆō A list of arguments `[arg1, arg2, ...]` that will be passed to the
    `cmake --build ... arg1 arg2` command directly.
  * **build_tool_args** ŌĆō A list of arguments `[barg1, barg2, ...]` for the underlying
    build system that will be passed to the command
    line after the `--` indicator: `cmake --build ... -- barg1 barg2`
  * **subfolder** ŌĆō (Experimental): subfolder to be created inside the `build_folder` and
    the `package_folder`. If not provided, files will be
    placed in the `build_folder` and `package_folder` root.
  * **stdout** ŌĆō Use it to redirect stdout to this stream
  * **stderr** ŌĆō Use it to redirect stderr to this stream

#### install(build_type=None, component=None, cli_args=None, stdout=None, stderr=None, subfolder=None)

Equivalent to running `cmake --install`

* **Parameters:**
  * **component** ŌĆō The specific component to install, if any
  * **build_type** ŌĆō Use it only to override the value defined in the settings.build_type.
    It can fail if the build is single configuration (e.g. Unix Makefiles),
    as in that case the build type must be specified at configure time,
    not build type.
  * **cli_args** ŌĆō A list of arguments `[arg1, arg2, ...]` for the underlying build system
    that will be passed to the command line: `cmake --install ... arg1 arg2`
  * **subfolder** ŌĆō (Experimental): subfolder to be created inside the `build_folder` and
    the `package_folder`. If not provided, files will be
    placed in the `build_folder` and `package_folder` root.
  * **stdout** ŌĆō Use it to redirect stdout to this stream
  * **stderr** ŌĆō Use it to redirect stderr to this stream

#### test(build_type=None, target=None, cli_args=None, build_tool_args=None, env='', stdout=None, stderr=None)

Equivalent to running cmake ŌĆōbuild . ŌĆōtarget=RUN_TESTS.

* **Parameters:**
  * **build_type** ŌĆō Use it only to override the value defined in the `settings.build_type`.
    It can fail if the build is single configuration (e.g. Unix Makefiles), as
    in that case the build type must be specified at configure time, not build
    time.
  * **target** ŌĆō Name of the build target to run, by default `RUN_TESTS` or `test`
  * **cli_args** ŌĆō Same as above `build()`, a list of arguments `[arg1, arg2, ...]`
    to be passed as extra arguments for the underlying build system
  * **build_tool_args** ŌĆō Same as above `build()`
  * **stdout** ŌĆō Use it to redirect stdout to this stream
  * **stderr** ŌĆō Use it to redirect stderr to this stream

#### ctest(cli_args=None, env='', stdout=None, stderr=None)

Equivalent to running ctest ŌĆ”

* **Parameters:**
  * **cli_args** ŌĆō List of arguments `[arg1, arg2, ...]` to be passed as extra ctest
    command line arguments
  * **env** ŌĆō the environment files to activate, by default conanbuild + conanrun
  * **stdout** ŌĆō Use it to redirect stdout to this stream
  * **stderr** ŌĆō Use it to redirect stderr to this stream

### conf

The `CMake()` build helper is affected by these `[conf]` variables:

- `tools.build:verbosity` will accept one of `quiet` or `verbose` to be passed to the `CMake.build()` command,
  when a Visual Studio generator (MSBuild build system) is being used for CMake. It is passed as
  an argument to the underlying build system via the call `cmake --build . --config Release -- /verbosity:Diagnostic`
- `tools.compilation:verbosity` will accept one of `quiet` or `verbose` to be passed to CMake,
  which sets `-DCMAKE_VERBOSE_MAKEFILE` if `verbose`
- `tools.build:jobs` argument for the `--jobs` parameter when running Ninja generator.
- `tools.microsoft.msbuild:max_cpu_count` argument for the `/m` (`/maxCpuCount`) when running
  `MSBuild`. If `max_cpu_count=0`, then it will use `/m` without arguments, which means use all available cpus.
- `tools.cmake:cmake_program` specify the location of the CMake executable, instead of using the one found in the `PATH`.
- `tools.cmake:ctest_args` (Since Conan 2.23.0) will inject a list of arguments to the `CMake.ctest()` runner. For example, `tools.cmake:ctest_args=["--debug", "--output-junit myfile"]` will add these arguments to the ctest command.
- `tools.cmake:install_strip` (**deprecated** use `tools.build:install_strip`) will pass `--strip` to the `cmake --install` call if set to `True`.
- `tools.build:install_strip` (Since Conan 2.18.0) will pass `--strip` to the `cmake --install` call if set to `True`.
- `tools.cmake:configure_args` (Since Conan 2.27) allows injecting extra arguments (list) to the `cmake ...` configure command line executed by `cmake.configure()`. This allows to inject arguments such as `--fresh` to force a fresh build when doing local development (`conan build -c tools.cmake:configure_args="['--fresh']"` command), or to inject arbitrary CMake variables, specifying `-DMYCMAKE_VAR=VALUE` as it would be specified in the command line.
