<a id="reference-conanfile-methods-layout"></a>

# layout()

In the layout() method you can adjust `self.folders` and `self.cpp`.

<a id="layout-folders-reference"></a>

## self.folders

- **self.folders.source** (Defaulted to `""`): Specifies a subfolder where the sources are.
  The `self.source_folder` attribute inside the `source(self)` and `build(self)`
  methods will be set with this subfolder. The *current working directory* in the
  `source(self)` method will include this subfolder. The export_sources and exports sources will also be copied to the root source directory. It is used in the cache
  when running **conan create** (relative to the cache source folder) as well as in
  a local folder when running **conan build** (relative to the local current
  folder).
- **self.folders.build** (Defaulted to `""`): Specifies a subfolder where the files from the
  build are. The `self.build_folder` attribute and the *current working directory*
  inside the `build(self)` method will be set with this subfolder. It is used in the
  cache when running **conan create** (relative to the cache source folder) as well
  as in a local folder when running **conan build** (relative to the local current
  folder).
- **self.folders.generators** (Defaulted to `""`): Specifies a subfolder in which to write the
  files from the generators and the toolchains. In the cache, when running
  **conan create**, this subfolder will be relative to the root build folder and
  when running the **conan install** command it will be relative to the current
  working directory.
- **self.folders.root** (Defaulted to `None`): Specifies a parent directory where the
  sources, generators, etc., are located specifically when the `conanfile.py` is located
  in a separated subdirectory. Check [this
  example](https://docs.conan.io/2//examples/conanfile/layout/conanfile_in_subfolder.html.md#examples-conanfile-layout-conanfile-in-subfolder) on how to use
  **self.folders.root**.
- **self.folders.subproject** (Defaulted to `None`): Specifies a subfolder where the
  `conanfile.py` is relative to the project root. This is particularly useful for
  [layouts with multiple subprojects](https://docs.conan.io/2//examples/conanfile/layout/multiple_subprojects.html.md#examples-conanfile-layout-multiple-subprojects)
- **self.folders.build_folder_vars** (Defaulted to `None`): Use settings, options and/or
  `self.name` and `self.version` to produce a different build folder and different CMake presets names.

<a id="layout-cpp-reference"></a>

## self.cpp

The `layout()` method allows to declare `cpp_info` objects not only for the final
package (like the classic approach with the `self.cpp_info` in the
`package_info(self)` method) but for the `self.source_folder` and
`self.build_folder`.

The fields of the `cpp_info` objects at `self.cpp.build` and `self.cpp.source` are the
same described [here](https://docs.conan.io/2//reference/conanfile/methods/package_info.html.md#conan-conanfile-model-cppinfo). Components are also supported.

Properties to declare all the information needed by the consumers of a package: include directories,
library names, library paths… Used both for [editable packages](https://docs.conan.io/2//tutorial/developing_packages/editable_packages.html.md#editable-packages) and regular packages in the cache.

There are three objects available in the `layout()` method:

- **self.cpp.package**: For a regular package being used from the Conan cache. Describes the contents of the final package.
  Exactly the same as in the `package_info()` `self.cpp_info`, but in the `layout()` method.
- **self.cpp.source**: For “editable” packages, to describe the artifacts under `self.source_folder`. These can cover:
  > - `self.cpp.source.includedirs`: To specify where the headers are at development time, like the typical `src` folder,
  >   before being packaged in the `include` package folder.
  > - `self.cpp.source.libdirs` and `self.cpp.source.libs` could describe the case where libraries are committed to source
  >   control (hopefully exceptional case), so they are not part of the build results, but part of the source.
- **self.cpp.build**: For “editable” packages, to describe the artifacts under `self.build_folder`.
  > - `self.cpp.build.libdirs` will express the location of the built libraries before being packaged. They can often be found
  >   in a folder like `x64/Release`, or `release64` or similar.
  > - `self.cpp.build.includedirs` can define the location of headers that are generated at build time, like headers stubs
  >   generated by some tools.

```python
def layout(self):
    ...
    self.folders.source = "src"
    self.folders.build = "build"

    # In the local folder (when the package is in development, or "editable") the artifacts can be found:
    self.cpp.source.includedirs = ["my_includes"]
    self.cpp.build.libdirs = ["lib/x86_64"]
    self.cpp.build.libs = ["foo"]

    # In the Conan cache, we packaged everything at the default standard directories, the library to link
    # is "foo"
    self.cpp.package.libs = ["foo"]
```

#### SEE ALSO
- Read more about the usage of the `layout()` in [this tutorial](https://docs.conan.io/2//tutorial/developing_packages/package_layout.html.md#developing-packages-layout) and Conan package layout
- [here](https://docs.conan.io/2//tutorial/developing_packages/package_layout.html.md#tutorial-package-layout).

## Environment variables and configuration

There are some packages that might define some environment variables in their
`package_info()` method via `self.buildenv_info`, `self.runenv_info`. Other
packages can also use `self.conf_info` to pass configuration to their consumers.

This is not an issue as long as the value of those environment variables or configuration
do not require using the `self.package_folder`. If they do, then their values will
not be correct for the “source” and “build” layouts. Something like this will be **broken**
when used in `editable` mode:

```python
import os
from conan import ConanFile

class SayConan(ConanFile):
    ...
    def package_info(self):
        # This is BROKEN if we put this package in editable mode
        self.runenv_info.define_path("MYDATA_PATH",
                                     os.path.join(self.package_folder, "my/data/path"))
```

When the package is in editable mode, for example, `self.package_folder` is `None`, as
obviously there is no package yet.
The solution is to define it in the `layout()` method, in the same way the `cpp_info` can
be defined there:

```python
from conan import ConanFile

class SayConan(ConanFile):
    ...
    def layout(self):
        # The final path will be relative to the self.source_folder
        self.layouts.source.buildenv_info.define_path("MYDATA_PATH", "my/source/data/path")
        # The final path will be relative to the self.build_folder
        self.layouts.build.buildenv_info.define_path("MYDATA_PATH2", "my/build/data/path")
        # The final path will be relative to the self.build_folder
        self.layouts.build.conf_info.define_path("user.myconf:my_path", "my_conf_folder")
        # Both for user defined confs, or in the case of tool-requires, also built-in confs
        self.layouts.build.conf_info.define_path("tools.android:ndk_path", "local/path/to/ndk")
```

The `layouts` object contains `source`, `build` and `package` scopes, and each one contains
one instance of `buildenv_info`, `runenv_info` and `conf_info`.
