<a id="conan-tools-qbsdeps"></a>

# QbsDeps

The `QbsDeps` generator produces the necessary files for each dependency to be able to use the
qbs `Depends` item to locate the dependencies. It can be used like:

```python
from conan import ConanFile

class App(ConanFile):
    settings = "os", "arch", "compiler", "build_type"
    requires = "hello/0.1"
    generators = "QbsDeps"
```

It is also possible to use `QbsDeps` manually in the `generate()` method:

```python
from conan import ConanFile
from conan.tools.qbs import QbsDeps

class App(ConanFile):
    settings = "os", "arch", "compiler", "build_type"
    requires = "hello/0.1"

    def generate(self):
        deps = QbsDeps(self)
        deps.generate()
```

The dependency to the application can be added using the `Depends` item:

```js
CppApplication {
    Depends { name: "hello"; version: "0.1" }
    files: "main.c"
    qbs.installPrefix: ""
    install: true
    qbsModuleProviders: "conan"
    moduleProviders.conan.installDirectory: "build"
}
```

Note that we are setting the `qbsModuleProviders` property to `"conan"` in order to tell
Qbs that dependencies are generated by Conan. We also set the `installDirectory` property
of the `conan` module provider to `"build"` to tell the provider to look for generated files
in the `build` directory within the source directory. It is also possible to set this value from
command line.

We install dependencies using the `conan install` command.

```text
$ conan install . --output-folder=build --build missing
```

Finally, we can build the project by simply calling Qbs:

```text
$ qbs
```

Note, that Qbs helper will automatically set the `conan.installDirectory` property when QbsDeps
generator is used.

#### SEE ALSO
- Check the [Qbs helper](https://docs.conan.io/2//reference/tools/qbs/qbs.html.md#conan-tools-qbs-helper) for details.

## Reference

### *class* QbsDeps(conanfile)

This class will generate a JSON file for each dependency inside the “conan-qbs-deps” folder.
Each JSON file contains information necesary for Qbs `"conan" module provider` to be
able to generate Qbs module files.

* **Parameters:**
  **conanfile** – The current recipe object. Always use `self`.

#### *property* content

Returns all dependency information as a Python dict object where key is the dependency
name and value is a dict with dependency properties.

#### generate()

This method will save the generated files to the “conan-qbs-deps” directory inside the
`conanfile.generators_folder` directory.
Generates a single JSON file per dependency or component.
