.. _conan_tools_apple:

conan.tools.apple
=================

.. warning::

    These tools are still **experimental** (so subject to breaking changes) but with very stable syntax.
    We encourage the usage of it to be prepared for Conan 2.0.

.. _conan_tools_apple_xcodedeps:

XcodeDeps
---------

Available since: `1.42.0 <https://github.com/conan-io/conan/releases>`_

The ``XcodeDeps`` tool is the dependency information generator for *Xcode*. It will generate multiple
*.xcconfig* configuration files, the can be used by consumers using *xcodebuild* or *Xcode*. To use
them just add the generated configuration files to the Xcode project or set the ``-xcconfig``
argument from the command line.

The ``XcodeDeps`` generator can be used by name in conanfiles:

.. code-block:: python
    :caption: conanfile.py

    class Pkg(ConanFile):
        generators = "XcodeDeps"

.. code-block:: text
    :caption: conanfile.txt

    [generators]
    XcodeDeps

And it can also be fully instantiated in the conanfile ``generate()`` method:

.. code-block:: python
    :caption: conanfile.py

    from conan import ConanFile
    from conan.tools.apple import XcodeDeps

    class Pkg(ConanFile):
        settings = "os", "compiler", "arch", "build_type"
        requires = "libpng/1.6.37@" # Note libpng has zlib as transitive dependency

        def generate(self):
            xcode = XcodeDeps(self)
            xcode.generate()

When the ``XcodeDeps`` generator is used, every invocation of ``conan install`` will
generate several configuration files, per dependency and configuration. For the *conanfile.py*
above, for example:

.. code-block:: bash

    $ conan install conanfile.py # default is Release
    $ conan install conanfile.py -s build_type=Debug

This generator is multi-configuration. It will generate different files for the different
*Debug/Release* configurations for each requirement. It will also generate one single file
(*conandeps.xcconfig*) aggregating all the files for the direct dependencies (just *libpng* in this
case). The above commands generate the following files:

.. code-block:: bash

  .
  ├── conan_config.xcconfig
  ├── conan_libpng.xcconfig
  ├── conan_libpng_libpng.xcconfig
  ├── conan_libpng_libpng_debug_x86_64.xcconfig
  ├── conan_libpng_libpng_release_x86_64.xcconfig
  ├── conan_zlib.xcconfig
  ├── conan_zlib_zlib.xcconfig
  ├── conan_zlib_zlib_debug_x86_64.xcconfig
  ├── conan_zlib_zlib_release_x86_64.xcconfig
  └── conandeps.xcconfig


The first ``conan install`` with the default *Release* and *x86_64* configuration generates: 

- *conan_libpng_libpng_release_x86_64.xcconfig*: declares variables with conditional logic to be considered only for the active configuration in *Xcode* or the one passed by command line to *xcodebuild*.
- *conan_libpng_libpng.xcconfig*: includes *conan_libpng_libpng_release_x86_64.xcconfig* and declares the following *Xcode* build settings: ``HEADER_SEARCH_PATHS``, ``GCC_PREPROCESSOR_DEFINITIONS``, ``OTHER_CFLAGS``, ``OTHER_CPLUSPLUSFLAGS``, ``FRAMEWORK_SEARCH_PATHS``, ``LIBRARY_SEARCH_PATHS``, ``OTHER_LDFLAGS``. It also includes the generated *xcconfig* files for transitive dependencies (*conan_zlib_zlib.xcconfig* in this case).
- *conan_libpng.xcconfig*: in this case it only includes *conan_libpng_libpng.xcconfig*, but in the case that the required package has components, this file will include all of the components of the package.
- Same 3 files will be generated for each dependency in the graph. In this case, as *zlib* is a dependency of *libpng* it will generate: *conan_zlib_zlib_release_x86_64.xcconfig*, *conan_zlib_zlib.xcconfig* and *conan_zlib.xcconfig*.
- *conandeps.xcconfig*: configuration files including all direct dependencies, in this case, it just includes ``conan_libpng.xcconfig``.
- The main *conan_config.xcconfig* file, to be added to the project. Includes both the files from this generator and the generated by the :ref:`XcodeToolchain<conan_tools_apple_xcodetoolchain>` in case it was also set.

The second ``conan install -s build_type=Debug`` generates: 

- *conan_libpng_libpng_debug_x86_64.xcconfig*: same variables as the one below for *Debug* configuration.
- *conan_libpng_libpng.xcconfig*: this file has been already creted by the previous command, now it's modified to add the include for *conan_libpng_debug_x86_64.xcconfig*.
- *conan_libpng.xcconfig*: this file will remain the same.
- Like in the previous command the same 3 files will be generated for each dependency in the graph. In this case, as *zlib* is a dependency of *libpng* it will generate: *conan_zlib_zlib_debug_x86_64.xcconfig*, *conan_zlib_zlib.xcconfig* and *conan_zlib.xcconfig*.
- *conandeps.xcconfig*: configuration files including all direct dependencies, in this case, it just includes ``conan_libpng.xcconfig``.
- The main *conan_config.xcconfig* file, to be added to the project. Includes both the files from this generator and the generated by the :ref:`XcodeToolchain<conan_tools_apple_xcodetoolchain>` in case it was also set.

If you want to add this dependencies to you Xcode project, you just have to add the
*conan_config.xcconfig* configuration file for all of the configurations you want to use
(usually *Debug* and *Release*).

Components support
++++++++++++++++++

Since Conan version `1.49.0 <https://github.com/conan-io/conan/releases>`_, this generator
supports packages with components. That means that:

* If a **dependency** ``package_info()`` declares ``cpp_info.requires`` on some
  components, the generated *.xcconfig* files will contain includes to only those
  components.

* The current package ``requires`` will be fully dependent on and all components. Recall
  that the ``package_info()`` only applies for consumers, but not to the current package.


Custom configurations
+++++++++++++++++++++

If your Xcode project defines custom configurations, like ``ReleaseShared``, or ``MyCustomConfig``,
it is possible to define it into the ``XcodeDeps`` generator, so different project configurations can
use different set of dependencies. Let's say that our current project can be built as a shared library,
with the custom configuration ``ReleaseShared``, and the package also controls this with the ``shared``
option:

.. code-block:: python

    from conan import ConanFile
    from conan.tools.apple import XcodeDeps

    class Pkg(ConanFile):
        settings = "os", "compiler", "arch", "build_type"
        options = {"shared": [True, False]}
        default_options = {"shared": False}
        requires = "zlib/1.2.11"

        def generate(self):
            xcode = XcodeDeps(self)
            # We assume that -o *:shared=True is used to install all shared deps too
            if self.options.shared:
                xcode.configuration = str(self.settings.build_type) + "Shared"
            xcode.generate()

This will manage to generate new *.xcconfig* files for this custom configuration, and when you switch
to this configuration in the IDE, the build system will take the correct values depending wether we
want to link with shared or static libraries.

.. _conan_tools_apple_xcodetoolchain:

XcodeToolchain
--------------

Available since: `1.46.0 <https://github.com/conan-io/conan/releases>`_

The ``XcodeToolchain`` is the toolchain generator for Xcode. It will generate *.xcconfig*
configuration files that can be added to Xcode projects. This generator translates the
current package configuration, settings, and options, into Xcode *.xcconfig* files syntax.

The ``XcodeToolchain`` generator can be used by name in conanfiles:

.. code-block:: python
    :caption: conanfile.py

    class Pkg(ConanFile):
        generators = "XcodeToolchain"

.. code-block:: text
    :caption: conanfile.txt

    [generators]
    XcodeToolchain

And it can also be fully instantiated in the conanfile ``generate()`` method:

.. code:: python

    from conan import ConanFile
    from conan.tools.apple import XcodeToolchain

    class App(ConanFile):
        settings = "os", "arch", "compiler", "build_type"

        def generate(self):
            tc = XcodeToolchain(self)
            tc.generate()


The ``XcodeToolchain`` will generate three files after a ``conan install`` command. As
explained above for the XcodeDeps generator, each different configuration will create a
set of files with different names. For example, running ``conan install`` for *Release*
first and then *Debug* configuration:

.. code-block:: bash

    $ conan install conanfile.py # default is Release
    $ conan install conanfile.py -s build_type=Debug

Will create these files:

.. code-block:: bash

    .
    ├── conan_config.xcconfig
    ├── conantoolchain_release_x86_64.xcconfig
    ├── conantoolchain_debug_x86_64.xcconfig
    ├── conantoolchain.xcconfig
    └── conan_global_flags.xcconfig

Those files are:

- The main *conan_config.xcconfig* file, to be added to the project. Includes both the
  files from this generator and the generated by the
  :ref:`XcodeDeps<conan_tools_apple_xcodedeps>` in case it was also set.
- *conantoolchain_<debug/release>_x86_64.xcconfig*: declares ``CLANG_CXX_LIBRARY``,
  ``CLANG_CXX_LANGUAGE_STANDARD`` and ``MACOSX_DEPLOYMENT_TARGET`` variables with
  conditional logic depending on the build configuration, architecture and sdk set.
- *conantoolchain.xcconfig*: aggregates all the *conantoolchain_<config>_<arch>.xcconfig*
  files for the different installed configurations.
- *conan_global_flags.xcconfig*: this file will only be generated in case of any
  configuration variables related to compiler or linker flags are set. Check :ref:`the
  configuration section<xcodetoolchain_conf>` below for more details.


Every invocation to ``conan install`` with different configuration will create a new
*conantoolchain_<config>_<arch>.xcconfig* file that is aggregated in the
*conantoolchain.xcconfig*, so you can have different configurations included in your Xcode
project.

The XcodeToolchain files can declare the following Xcode build settings based on Conan settings values:

- ``MACOSX_DEPLOYMENT_TARGET`` is based on the value of the ``os.version`` setting and
  will make the build system to pass the flag ``-mmacosx-version-min`` with that value (if
  set). It defines the operating system version the binary should run into.
- ``CLANG_CXX_LANGUAGE_STANDARD`` is based on the value of the ``compiler.cppstd`` setting
  that sets the C++ language standard.
- ``CLANG_CXX_LIBRARY`` is based on the value of the compiler.libcxx setting and sets the
  version of the C++ standard library to use.

One of the advantages of using toolchains is that they can help to achieve the exact same build
with local development flows, than when the package is created in the cache.

.. _xcodetoolchain_conf:

conf
++++

This toolchain is also affected by these :ref:`[conf]<global_conf>` variables:

- ``tools.build:cxxflags`` list of C++ flags.
- ``tools.build:cflags`` list of pure C flags.
- ``tools.build:sharedlinkflags`` list of flags that will be used by the linker when creating a shared library.
- ``tools.build:exelinkflags`` list of flags that will be used by the linker when creating an executable.
- ``tools.build:defines`` list of preprocessor definitions.

If you set any of these variables, the toolchain will use them to generate the
``conan_global_flags.xcconfig`` file that will be included from the ``conan_config.xcconfig``
file.

XcodeBuild
----------

Available since: `1.46.0 <https://github.com/conan-io/conan/releases>`_

The ``Xcode`` build helper is a wrapper around the command line invocation of Xcode. It
will abstract the calls like ``xcodebuild -project app.xcodeproj -configuration <config>
-arch <arch> ...``

The ``Xcode`` helper can be used like:

.. code:: python

    from conan import ConanFile
    from conan.tools.apple import XcodeBuild

    class App(ConanFile):
        settings = "os", "arch", "compiler", "build_type"

        def build(self):
            xcodebuild = XcodeBuild(self)
            xcodebuild.build("app.xcodeproj")

Xcode.build() method
++++++++++++++++++++

.. code:: python

    def build(self, xcodeproj, target=None):

- ``xcodeproj``: the *xcodeproj* file to build.
- ``target``: the target to build, in case this argument is passed to the ``build()``
  method it will add the ``-target`` argument to the build system call. If not passed, it
  will build all the targets passing the ``-alltargets`` argument instead.


The ``Xcode.build()`` method internally implements a call to ``xcodebuild`` like:

.. code:: bash

    $ xcodebuild -project app.xcodeproj -configuration <configuration> -arch <architecture> <sdk> <verbosity> -target <target>/-alltargets

Where:

- ``configuration`` is the configuration, typically *Release* or *Debug*, which will be obtained
  from ``settings.build_type``.
- ``architecture`` is the build architecture, a mapping from the ``settings.arch`` to the
  common architectures defined by Apple 'i386', 'x86_64', 'armv7', 'arm64', etc.
- ``sdk`` is set based on the values of the ``os.sdk`` and ``os.sdk_version`` defining the
  ``SDKROOT`` Xcode build setting according to them. For example, setting ``os.sdk=iOS``
  and `os.sdk_version=8.3`` will pass ``SDKROOT=iOS8.3`` to the build system. In case you
  defined the ``tools.apple:sdk_path`` in your :ref:`[conf]<global_conf>` this value will
  take preference and will directly pass ``SDKROOT=<tools.apple:sdk_path>`` so **take into
  account** that for this case the skd located in that path should set your ``os.sdk`` and
  ``os.sdk_version`` settings values.
- ``verbosity`` is the verbosity level for the build and can take value 'verbose' or
  'quiet' if set by ``tools.apple.xcodebuild:verbosity`` in your
  :ref:`[conf]<global_conf>`

conf
++++

- ``tools.apple.xcodebuild:verbosity`` verbosity value for the build, can be 'verbose' or 'quiet'
- ``tools.apple:sdk_path`` path for the sdk location, will set the ``SDKROOT`` value with
  preference over composing the value from the ``os.sdk`` and ``os.sdk_version`` settings.

.. _conan_tools_apple_fix_apple_shared_install_name:

conan.tools.apple.fix_apple_shared_install_name()
-------------------------------------------------

.. code-block:: python

    def fix_apple_shared_install_name(conanfile):

Parameters:

- **conanfile**: Conanfile instance.

This tool will search for all the *dylib* files in the conanfile's *package_folder* and fix
both the ``LC_ID_DYLIB`` and ``LC_LOAD_DYLIB`` fields on those files using the
*install_name_tool* utility available in macOS.

* For ``LC_ID_DYLIB`` which is the field containing the install name of the library, it
  will change the install name to one that uses the ``@rpath``. For example, if the
  install name is ``/path/to/lib/libname.dylib``, the new install name will be
  ``@rpath/libname.dylib``. This is done by executing internally something like: 
  
.. code-block:: bash
  
  install_name_tool /path/to/lib/libname.dylib -id @rpath/libname.dylib

* For ``LC_LOAD_DYLIB`` which is the field containing the path to the library
  dependencies, it will change the path of the dependencies to one that uses the
  ``@rpath``. For example, if the path is ``/path/to/lib/dependency.dylib``, the new path
  will be ``@rpath/dependency.dylib``. This is done by executing internally something
  like:

.. code-block:: bash
  
  install_name_tool /path/to/lib/libname.dylib -change /path/to/lib/dependency.dylib @rpath/dependency.dylib


This tool is typically needed by recipes that use Autotools as the build system and in the
case that the correct install names are not fixed in the library being packaged. Use this
tool, if needed, in the conanfile's ``package()`` method like:

.. code-block:: python

    from conan.tools.apple import fix_apple_shared_install_name

    class HelloConan(ConanFile):

      ...

      def package(self):
          autotools = Autotools(self)
          autotools.install()
          fix_apple_shared_install_name(self)

.. _conan_tools_apple_is_apple_os:

is_apple_os()
-------------

.. code-block:: python

    def is_apple_os(conanfile):

Parameters:

- **conanfile**: Conanfile instance.

This tool returns ``True`` if the OS is from Apple (Macos, iOS, watchOS or tvOS)
